In this video we'll talk about the steps needed to read input from text files using C++ streams.
In the following slides I'll talk about the main classes and methods that we can use to read from files
and then I'll go over a bunch of examples in live code so that you can see alternative ways to read
text data from files depending on the type of data we want to read.
First of all talk about input files and reading from them and then in another video we'll discuss output
files and writing to them.
The two classes that I'll discuss for text file input are F. stream and stream.
There are a few steps that we must always perform when we read from files.
The first is to include the F stream header file then we declare a stream object of either stream or
stream type.
We then connect the stream object that we just created to the file that we want to read from on our
file system.
File systems are very different.
So we have to be sure that we get the file name and the path correct.
I'll talk more about that later.
Once the file is connected and open then we can read from it.
There are many many different ways to read from a file.
We can read in binary mode we can read in text mode.
We can read one line at a time one character at a time.
We can use methods like getline and we can use the extraction operator like we've been doing with C
in then when we're done processing the file.
We have to close the file.
This should sound pretty easy and for the most part it is in the next few slides.
We'll discuss the details of opening a file checking to make sure that the file was opened correctly
reading from the file in various ways and then closing the file.
So let's get started creating the stream object.
In this example we're creating an object named infile in we're using the F stream class as its type.
Notice that I'm initializing the object as well.
The initializer takes two arguments.
The first is the name of a file.
This can sometimes be very operating system specific and also very ideally specific in the code like
we always open our files one directory up from where the executive lives.
That's why we're using dot dot forward slash before the phone and I'll talk more about filenames in
the live code session and also include a video at the end of the section that talks about the file path
used for some other ideas.
But for now let's assume the file is where it's supposed to be.
The second parameter specifies the mode and any other properties of the this being opened in the first
example we're using stood iOS in.
This means to open the file in input mode.
So we're able to read from it but not write to it by default.
Files are opened in text mode in the second example.
We're opening the file in input mode and in binary mode this is necessary when reading non-text files
that contain binary data.
We won't be doing that and this course will work strictly with text files.
Notice the vertical bar or the pipe operator between studio s in and studio s binary.
This is the bitwise OR operator when used with Bit fields such as these.
It sets both the input and the binary modes to true.
At this point the file will be opened if it was found in this slide we used the stream class the stream
class can actually open up a file for reading and writing at the same time.
We won't be doing that but if you have a file that you use only for input it's more common to use the
F stream class.
Let's see that in the next slide.
In this slide reusing the stream class as the type for file Lifestream is used for input files only.
We can create an extreme object the same way we created an extreme object.
However in the case of an extreme object the Stood IOAS in is optional since it's already the default.
So the first two declarations of infile have the same effect.
The last declaration opens in file in binary mode.
There's another way to open a file that's commonly seen in code.
So let's take a look at that next.
In this example notice that we're creating infile as an extreme but we haven't provided any file name
to associate with it yet.
This is a common use case since many times we don't know the file name and we have to get it from a
user or from some other source at runtime.
Once we have the file name we can then use it and use the open method on the stream object to open the
file so we can say infile dot open and provide the filename or in file open file name and then any flags
we need to set.
Now that we attempted to create the stream and connected to a file we have to be sure that this was
successful before we start reading from the file.
So let's do that next so we have to be sure that the file was open successfully.
Maybe it wasn't founded there was some sort of hardware or permission issue.
There are a few ways that we can check to see if the file was open successfully.
We can call the is open method of the file stream object that we created.
This will return a boolean indicating whether the file is open for processing or not.
If we get back.
True.
We're good to go if we get back fault something happened that we can't read from the file.
In the case of this error what do we do.
Well it depends on the application.
We might just display an error message and terminate the program.
We might see if weeks and somehow recreate that file from a backup.
It's totally application dependent.
In our examples we'll simply display an error message and terminate the program.
If there was no such error then we can go ahead and read from the file.
Now let's see another way that we can test to see if the file was opened successfully.
In this case we can simply test the stream object itself.
If we couldn't open the file then this would return false.
And then we can decide what to do.
Otherwise it's good and we can proceed reading from the file.
But let's talk about the last step first.
That is closing the file once we finish reading from the file we must close it.
This is a simple method call to the close method with input files.
It's not so critical but when we talk about output files closing them is very important.
OK so now that we know how to open a file check to make sure that it's open and close it.
Let's do the part that's the most fun reading from.
There are many many ways to read from a file.
And these examples we'll be using text files.
We can read formatted data from the text file using the stream extraction operator.
Remember that one we've used that all along with CNH to get input from the keyboard.
Well now we can use it again to get input from the file stream.
In this example let's suppose that we have an integer a double and a string in a text file.
And we want to read these into our programs.
You can see the text files content to the little box here on the slides.
We can assume that infile was created successfully.
Notice that we create three variables.
Numb is an int.
Total is a double and name is a string.
Now we can read from infile using the extraction operator.
The first statement will read 100 and stored in the second statement we're read in 255 point 6:07 and
stored in total and then read Larry unstored a name.
That's it.
Simple as pie.
We can have these three separate read statements on a single line.
We can chain them all together just like we did when we worked with S.N..
Sometimes we want to read files an entire line at a time and we know that the extraction operators will
stop when they see any white space.
So in this case we can use the getline method.
Remember that method we used it when we read lines from the keyboard using CN.
In this case suppose our file contains the string.
This is a line we create a string object called line and then we use getline with the name of the stream
we're reading from and the stream we're reading into.
That's it an entire line of text up to the new line will be read from the file and stored in the string
named line.
Really a single line from a file isn't too useful unless the file only has one line but usually files
have many lines of text.
So let's see how we can wrap this up in a loop to read all the lines in a text file.
Here's the sample code.
We can assume this code is in Main in all the necessary header files have been included.
First we declare infile as an I-F stream and we connect it to my file.
Text we also declare line to be a string object.
That's where we'll store each line that we read from the text file.
Ok so first let's make sure the file is open successfully.
You can see in the if statement that we're checking to see if not in file not in file will be true if
the file was not open successfully and if so we display an error message and we return something other
than 0 and our program terminates.
Otherwise we have an open file and we can start processing it we'll read the lines from the file in
a while loop.
And while we're in the while loop you'll see the condition while I'm not infile dot E O F F is a method
that returns true when we reached the end of the file so we're looping while we have not seen the end
of file at each loop iteration we use getline to read from in file and store an entire line of text
into a line.
Then we display line to the console and we iterate again at some point we'll reach the end of the file
and the loop terminates then we close the file and we're done.
So as you can see this program will read a text file from some file on disk and display its contents
to the console.
Pretty easy.
Now let's see a variation of this program that does the while loop condition a bit differently.
In this case the loop is while get line in file line.
At first you might think what's going on there.
Well we can embed many of the string input statements right into the while condition.
We can also embed statements that have the extraction operator in there since these statements return
a reference to the stream object.
They'll only return a true value when the read was successful.
So when we reached the end of file or some other error condition is encountered there will not return
true and the loop will terminate.
You could write code either way.
OK so one more example and then we'll see some examples in live code in the next video.
In this example we're again using infile as an extreme object but this time we're reading the file in
an informative manner.
In other words one character at a time.
Sometimes this is very useful since the extraction operator getline and other methods depend on white
space or new lines to be able to work correctly and formatted input reach one character at a time regardless
of what that character is.
The code in this example is exactly the same except that in the while loop condition we're reading a
single character into the variable c with the get method.
Then we simply output the character.
So as you can see this example also reads a file from disk and displays it to the console but it does
it in an unfortunate manner or one character at a time.
OK so in the next video we'll head over to the idea we'll read some files and I'll talk some more about
those file names.